# freebsd-install-on-zfs
FreeBSD ZFS custom installation script for use with bsdinstall.

## Quick Start
Basically, you need two hosts which can commnicate each other. One is a host to which you install FreeBSD ("Target" here) and the other is a host which provides the first one with this install script ("Provider" here). The latter may be your laptop or anything like that.

### Provider (hosting scripts to Target)
1. Clone this repository on the Provider.
    ```
    provider$ cd ~/tmp
    provider$ git clone https://github.com/genneko/freebsd-install-on-zfs.git
    ```

2. Copy/rename sample \*.cfg/scp files and edit them as needed.

    See [Configuration parameters](#configuration-parameters) for details.
    ```
    provider$ cd freebsd-install-on-zfs
    provider$ cp baremetal.cfg.sample myserver.cfg
    provider$ cp base.scp.sample base.scp
    provider$ cp pkg.scp.sample pkg.scp
    provider$ vi myserver.cfg
    provider$ vi base.scp
    provider$ vi pkg.scp
    ```

3. Start a web server to host this repository contents, more specifically install.sh and \*.cfg/scp files. Off course, you can also put those files into your existing web server's document directory instead of newly starting a service.

    One way to do this is using the python's built-in web server module as follows.
    ```
    provider$ python -m SimpleHTTPServer
    Serving HTTP on 0.0.0.0 port 8000 ...
    ```

### Target (a host to install FreeBSD on)
1. Boot the Target with a FreeBSD installer.

2. Go into shell at the welcome dialog.

3. Do the basic network and other configurations.

    If you specify a domainname for CUSTOM_CONFIG_BASEURL in .cfg, you also have to set NAMESERVER to one of the available nameserver IP addresses and export it.
    ```
    # dhclient em0
    # cat /etc/resolv.conf
    nameserver 192.168.10.1
    # export NAMESERVER=192.168.10.1
    ```
    or
    ```
    # ifconfig vtnet0 inet 172.16.10.100 netmask 255.255.255.0
    # route add default 172.16.10.1
    # cat<<EOS>/tmp/bsdinstall_etc/resolv.conf
    > nameserver 172.16.10.5
    > nameserver 172.16.20.5
    > EOS
    # export NAMESERVER=172.16.10.5
    ```

4. Download install.sh and .cfg file from the Provider. Note that you don't have to download \*.scp files because they are automatically downloaded in the second phase of the installtion process.
    ```
    # cd /tmp
    # fetch http://target.example.com:8000/install.sh
    # fetch http://target.example.com:8000/myserver.cfg
    ```

5. Set the CUSTOM_CONFIG_FILE to .cfg filename and export it.
    ```
    # export CUSTOM_CONFIG_FILE=myserver.cfg
    ```

6. Run bsdinstall with the script.
    If you set ZFSBOOT_GELI_ENCRYPTION to 1, you will be asked a passphrase for GELI.
    ```
    # bsdinstall script install.sh
    ```

7. Check a log file generated by bsdinstall.
    ```
    # less bsdinstall_log
    ```

8. Reboot into the newly installed system.
    If you enabled GELI encryption, you will be asked a passphrase in the earliest stage of boot process.
    ```
    # shutdown -r now
    ```

9. After the first boot, login as a DEFAULT_USER_NAME and perform necessary configurations as usual. You can also automate some of those tasks by customizing base.scp (OPTIONAL_SCRIPT_BASE).
    ```
    $ sudo passwd root
    $ passwd freebsd
    
    $ sudo zfs snapshot -r zroot/ROOT/default@install-03user
    $ sudo beadm create 11.1
    
    $ sudo freebsd-update fetch install
    
    $ sudo zfs snapshot -r zroot/ROOT/default@install-04up2p4
    ..
    ```

## Configuration parameters
### Variables used during system installation process (phase 1)
__Bold__ is mandatory while the others are optional.

- DISTRIBUTIONS

    System components to install such as base.txz, kernel.txz, src.txz, lib32.txz, ports.txz and doc.txz. List them using space as a delimiter. Default is "base.txz kernel.txz".

- __ZFSBOOT_DISKS__

    Space-delimited list of target disk(s) on which the OS is installed. You should set this appropriately to match your target system.

- __ZFSBOOT_VDEV_TYPE__

    How to bundle multiple disks (stripe, mirror, raid10, raidz1, raidz2 and raidz3). Specify 'stripe' for a single disk installation. Default is 'stripe' but you should check it anyway.
 
- ZFSBOOT_SWAP_SIZE

    Size of a dedicated swap partition. If you use ZVOL for swap, leave this at its default value and set the swap size in ZVOL_SWAP_SIZE instead. Default is 0.

- ZFSBOOT_GELI_ENCRYPTION

    Set this to non-empty value (e.g. 1) when you want to use whole disk encryption with GELI. Default is none.

- __ZFSBOOT_DATASETS__

    Specify a ZFS dataset layout.

### Variables used during post-installation setup process (phase 2)

- __CUSTOM_CONFIG_BASEURL__

    Web-accessible location of configuration file (.cfg) and optional post-installation scripts (.scp). They are automatically downloaded in the phase 2.

- __HOSTNAME__

    Target system's hostname. It can be a FQDN.

- __NIC_LIST__

    Space-delimited list of network interface names (e.g. "em0 em1").

- __IP_LIST__

    Space-delimited list of IP addresses. The order must match NIC_LIST.

- __NETMASK_LIST__

    Space-delimited list of netmasks. The order must match NIC_LIST.

- __DEFAULTROUTER__

    Default gateway (router) IP address.

- __SEARCHDOMAINS__

    Space-delimited list of domains used for name resolution.

- __NAMESERVER_LIST__

    Space-delimited list of name servers to use.

- DEFAULT_ROOT_PASSWORD

    Default password for root. Default is "root". Change this immediately after the first login.

- DEFAULT_USER_GROUP_NAME

    Group name for DEFAULT_USER_NAME. Default is "users".

- DEFAULT_USER_GROUP_ID

    Group ID for DEFAULT_USER_GROUP_NAME. Default is 100.

- DEFAULT_USER_NAME

    Default user name. Default is "freebsd".

- DEFAULT_USER_ID

    Default user ID for DEFAULT_USER_NAME. Default is 500.
    
- DEFAULT_USER_PASSWORD

    Default password for DEFAULT_USER_NAME. Default is "freebsd". Change this immediately after the first login.

- PKG_LIST

    Space-delimited list of FreeBSD's pkgng package names to install. Default is "beadm sudo zfstools".

- ZVOL_SWAP_SIZE

    Size of a ZVOL used for swap space. Default is 2G.

- KEYMAP

    A keymap to use (e.g. "jp"). Default is none (use system default).

- TIME_ZONE

    A timezone to use (e.g. "Asia/Tokyo"). Default is none (use system default).

- PROXY_SERVER

    Set this to something like ``http://proxyhost:port/`` if the target system has to use a HTTP proxy to reach outside world. Default is none.

- NO_PROXY

    Set this to a comma-separated list of domains which you want bypass proxy server. Only valid when PROXY_SERVER is also set. Default is none.

- SSH_PERMIT_ROOT_LOGIN_IPRANGE

    Set this to a comma-separated list of hostnames/addresses/CIDRs from which you want to SSH-login as root. Default is none.

- SSH_AUTHORIZED_KEYS_FILE

    A file which contains one or more SSH public key(s) with which you can SSH-login to the target system. This file should be in the same place on the web server as install.sh (CUSTOM_CONFIG_BASEURL). The file will be installed as DEFAULT_USER_NAME's ~/.ssh/authorized_keys. If SSH_PERMIT_ROOT_LOGIN_IPRANGE is set, it will be installed as /root/.ssh/authorized_keys too. Default is none.
    
- OPTIONAL_SCRIPT_INIT

    Optional script which is executed at the very beginning of the phase 2, just after the base system is installed. This file should be in the same place on the web server as install.sh (CUSTOM_CONFIG_BASEURL). Default is none.

- OPTIONAL_SCRIPT_BASE

    Optional script which is executed at the middle of the phase 2, just after the base system configurations are finished. This file should be in the same place on the web server as install.sh (CUSTOM_CONFIG_BASEURL). Default is none.

- OPTIONAL_SCRIPT_PKG

    Optional script which is executed at the end of the phase 2, just after the basic packages specified by PKG_LIST are installed (thus the end of the installation). This file should be in the same place on the web server as install.sh (CUSTOM_CONFIG_BASEURL). Default is none.

